Now there are a number of different
layouts that you can use to create app
screens in Android studio
and we're gonna have a quick look at a
few others a little bit later using
layouts to position items on the screen
used to be quite complicated when you
wanted to line things up horizontally
and vertically to get the screen just
the way you want but when they're
released Android Nuka Google introduced
the constraint layout and that basically
replaces the old relative layout and is
also a good alternative to many of the
older layouts now we're going to discuss
the older layouts later so that you're
familiar with them you may have to work
on updating older code so it's good to
at least be familiar with some of these
other layouts but for most of the
examples in this course I'm going to be
eating the new constraint layout and the
trusty linear layout when creating
layout screens now Google didn't just
introduce a new type of layout
they also completely revamped the
Android studio layout designer to handle
it so we're going to start a new project
and get into discovering how to use the
layout designer now the first project
we're going to create isn't that our
button click app it's just something
that we're going to have a play with the
designer and probably get it into a
right mess now the only way though to
learn how to use the designer is to try
it out so I'm not even going to run this
app I'm just going to be placing things
on the screen moving them around and
showing you how to put things where you
want them and have them stay there and
that's why I said we were going to play
with it so make sure you do have fun but
before we start that just wanted to
point out that one of the best widgets
for demonstrating this is an image view
and that's because it's a very visual
component and you can easily see it on
the screen so I'm going to be adding an
image view to our layout now an image
view without an image isn't very
interesting though so the first thing
you want to do is start by downloading
the sample images that I've included in
the resources section for this video now
you can actually get them by moving your
mouse up to the top left of this video
and clicking on the three bar menu icon
above resources available and that will
slide out a panel and you'll see the two
resources in this case ball underscore see
40 by 480 jpg and also ball underscore
100 by 100 dot jpg so download those
files and save them onto your hard drive
and then click the X above the tooltip
when you've done that and you're ready
to continue with this video now you can
of course use any any image that you
want so by all means use one of your own
pictures images if you prefer one thing
to note though is that there's a really
odd peculiarity in Android studio and
that's that it doesn't like images that
have capital letters in the filename now
you can only use the characters 0 to 9
and lowercase a to Z as well as the dash
underscore in . now you might be
wondering why that is the case but in
fact there's a good reason for this and
the reason is that filenames in windows
aren't case-sensitive
in other words Bordeaux jpg with a
capital B would be the same file as
balled-up jpg with a lowercase B however
on Linux or OSX Mac OS X they would
actually be two different files so it
would be very easy to produce a project
on one operating system that ultimately
wouldn't work on another operating
system so rather than building a complex
set of checking Google just made the
rule that uppercase letters aren't
allowed which makes everyone's life
easier so bear that in mind when you
create any type of resource in Android
studio including your images you should
really be using just a lowercase letters
now I also should suggest if you are
intending to use your own images that
you don't use a full HD in other words
of 1920 by 1080 image remembering that
this is going to be viewed on a 3-inch
wide screen alright so hopefully at this
point you've got the image file ready
it's time to create our test project so
I've got Android studio started now once
you can see on the screen and click on
start a new Android studio project now
we're going to be playing with the
designer a bit like a child with a box
of crayons so for that reason I'm going
to call this project plane now if you
make a write this and frankly I hope
that you do because it shows you've been
experimenting then you can create a new
project and call it playing 2 or playing
3 etc and also you can make a note of
the project location which you can see
over here
at the bottom of the screen and you can
use your file manager to delete the
entire playing directory if you wish
before starting again that's entirely up
to you know the company domain should
have been remembered from last time so
I'm going to leave that as to what it
was learn programming Academy now you of
course are free to use your own domain
there if you prefer but one thing to
bear in mind is that my sample code will
be using learn programming economy so
using something different can make it
harder for you to use differencing tools
on the projects when comparing your
source code with mine now I'm going to
be covering that later in this course so
if you want to keep things simple then
use the same domain names that I'm using
here learn programming dot Academy so
the project location should have been
filled in for you as it was for me on
the screen there and you can change that
to any suitable directory if you prefer
now the last thing to check on this
screen is the box labeled include Kotlin
support and you can see over here that
that is checked by default if you don't
tick that box Android studio is going to
generate Java code instead of Kotlin now
there's no difference in designing
layouts whether you're using Java or
Kotlin so this video is the same for my
java and Kotlin Android courses so if
you're actually in my Java Android
course in fact you'd want to take the
check box off but if you're in the
cotton course you want to click that to
include Kotlin support and by the way
it's perfectly possible to mix Java and
Kotlin in the same project in which case
you tick the box if you were deciding to
use a Java project to also include
Kotlin support for new though I suggest
that if you are in the Java course you
leave it on ticked for Java and ticked
for Kotlin so I'm going to click on next
so in this screen I'm going to choose
API 17 as the default as I've explained
in a previous video now we don't want
any of these other options I leave them
all unchecked and click on next now for
our purposes here we're going to use the
empty activity and that's highlighted by
default but if not check on that and
click on next again now there's nothing
to change on this next screen but you do
want to make sure that the two boxes
generate layout file with the checkbox
to the left there and backwards
compatibility app compat you want to
make sure that they're both checked as
they are
case and in terms of what they do will
generate to layout function creates a
layout file for you and if you want a
ticket then you just have to create the
layout from scratch now that actually
isn't hard to do and in fact in future
videos we'll be creating another layer
later that to white create will work at
this stage of the course and the
backwards compatibility box or the check
box that causes Android studio to use
the app compat library and that's so
that your code will work on earlier
versions of Android even if they use
features that were introduced in later
versions there's very rarely a reason to
unpick this so I'm going to leave it
checked
you know the suggested knowns for the
activity and layout main activity and
activity underscore main affine so I'm
now going to click on finish
then Android studio is now in the
processes of creating the project and
you can see that the build progress so
the build progress rather as it does
that and I'm running at this stage as
you can see a beta version of Android
studio 3 so it's a little bit slower
than what the final release will be but
we'll give it a moment to finish
all right you can see down the bottom
right hand corner that's working away
and the Gradle build is running and it's
actually indexing a few files it
actually does quite a bit of stuff even
after the editing window has appeared
and it's a good idea not to do too much
until all that's finished you can see
now down the bottom right hand corner of
the screen the progress bars disappeared
and for all intents and purposes now
it's finished setting things up and
we're ready to go all right so there's a
few things now that I want to talk about
with the layout designer and firstly
experiment and try things out you know
make a mess of it all and start again
maybe more than once you won't actually
do any harm and you can always delete
the project directories when you've made
a right mess of things if you're going
to do that you'd obviously want to shop
to an Android studio before he deleted
anything now it's in particularly
important to experiment with the layout
designer and that's because it changes
so much now Google introduced this new
layout designer in Android studio 2.2
back in 2016 and personally I've lost
count of how many changes they've made
to it through to version 2.3 3 and now
what we're running Android studio 3 now
we're actually working at the cutting
edge of mobile technology and Google are
constantly changing things now something
that works in a certain way today may
very well not work in that way or may
work differently tomorrow now we do
record videos frequently in this course
but if we try to keep up with all the
changes would never get any new content
added as it turns out I'm recalling
these videos in August and September
because Android Studios layout designer
is now very different to what it was
back in for every 2017
now that variable main make life
interesting quite and quite interesting
for us but I don't want you to feel
sorry for me it's far harder for you now
you're having to learn how to use a
development environment that's changing
all the time and frankly that's
certainly not easy when you're learning
to you and something new like Android
myself and JP we're so used to all of
this that sometimes we barely notice a
change but when you're standing out and
you haven't had much experience in the
software or in Android in general it can
get very confusing now there's not
really a lot that you can do about this
other than learning to live with it
experimenting now there was something we
can do to help and that's to explain
what's going on
so in these videos in this section of
the course I won't just be showing you a
series of keys to press or operations to
perform I'm gonna be explaining why
you're doing what you're doing
that way you'll develop an understanding
of what's going on why you're doing
certain things and what's happening when
you do now when you really understand
how it's all working change is much
easier to deal with all right so that's
what I'm going to be doing what you can
do though is experiment try things out
you know if you're not sure what a
button on the toolbar does one of these
buttons up here then just click one and
see what happens when you click it what
actually pops up on the screen when
there happens and just really had just
really experiment with the various
buttons to see what happens when you do
it what I can guarantee is one thing it
won't damage your computer the very
worst thing that will happen is that you
will do strange things to the project
and may have to start over again from
scratch but when you're learning going
through the one again is a good thing
all right now for the good news what
I've been saying really only applies to
the layout designer the Android code
base is far more stable that changes far
less frequently you know there are
changes that affect the code things like
annotations that we'll be looking at but
generally the code side of things well
that doesn't change very often so it's
not going to be as difficult as I may
have implied just now it's just that
this visual layout designer is the thing
that changes so often. Alright so let's
finish this video here and in the next
video we'll start getting stuck in and
talking more about and using the layout
designer. See you in the next video.